---
title: "Open positions in the CBIO lab"
tags: ["job"]
comments: false
---

There are a couple of opportunities to join the CBIO lab in 2022.

## Applied multi-omics integration

The [HYGIEIA project](https://www.saintluc.be/fr/hygieia) is a large
collaboration on the biomedical campus in Brussels. The PIs on the
project are Prof [Laure
Elens](https://uclouvain.be/en/directories/laure.elens) from the
[Louvain Drug Research Institute
(LDRI)](https://uclouvain.be/en/research-institutes/ldri), Prof
[Jean-Luc
Balligand](https://uclouvain.be/en/research-institutes/irec/fath/jean-luc-balligand.html)
from the [Institute of Clinical and Experimental Research
(IREC)](https://uclouvain.be/en/research-institutes/irec), myself from
the [de Duve
Institute](https://www.deduveinstitute.be/computational-biology), Prof
Jean Cyr Yombi and Prof Leïla Belkhir, both clinicians at the
infectious disease department at the [university
hospital](https://www.saintluc.be/fr/medecine-interne) and Prof
[Sébastien Jodogne](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jodogne/) from the
[Louvain Engineering School
(EPL)](https://uclouvain.be/en/faculties/epl). The goal is to
implement a complete multi-omics [network systems
medicine](https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wsbm.1489)
facilty, from patient samples, sample tracking, data production,
analysis and interpretation. The data production is handled by our
local core facilities and include proteomics, metabolomics and
genomics. This applied project is both technically challenging and
exciting and provides a unique opportunity to build such a facility
from grounds up. There are two positions bound to my research group
here:

- A computer scientist position that will, in collaboration with
  Sébastian Jodoigne and the wet lab team, model and build the IT
  infrastructure to track patients, samples and data. More details
  [here](https://jobs.uclouvain.be/PersonnelAdministratif/job/Ing%C3%A9nieur%C2%B7e-logiciel-pour-le-d%C3%A9veloppement-d&apos;une-plateforme-multi-omique-%28HFX%29/775921001/).

- A bioinformatics scientist to implement the multi-omics data
  processing and integration pipelines.

Both of these positions are initially funded for 1 year, renewable
once, thanks to the 2.7M euros seed fund of the Sofina solidarity
fund. We are anticipating additional funding to extend these
positions.

## Spatial proteomics and post-translational modifications

- As part of the Protein Contours project, I am also looking for an
  early career researcher focusing on spatial proteomics,
  post-translational modification and machine learning (see the
  [pRoloc](https://bioconductor.org/packages/pRoloc) package and
  [these](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24413670/)
  [papers](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006516)
  for some background). The Protein Contours project is funded by the
  [FWO](https://www.fwo.be/en/) and is in collaboration with [Win
  Vranken](https://we.vub.ac.be/en/wim-vranken) from the VUB and
  [Lennart Martens](https://www.compomics.com/people/lennart-martens/)
  from Gent University. The funding is for 1 to 2 years. Depending on
  the candidate's goals and background, there exist opportunities to
  extend the funding beyond.

## What to expect

The [CBIO lab](https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-lab/) is hosted at the de
Duve Institue in [Brussels](https://goo.gl/maps/Nkp56dTusAatrXMQ7)
since September 2018. The lab is fortunate to have a group of
dedicated and talented [members](https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-who/)
with diverse backgrounds and skills: currently we have two master
students with a biomedical background, one master student from
engineering, three PhD students (with backgrounds in biotechnology,
engineering and stats, and biomedical research and bioinformatics) and
two post-doctoral researchers (with PhD in biomedical sciences and
statistics). The lab also hosts the bioinformatics core facility.

We tackle a wide range of omics data and applications, either through
collaborations or generating our own data, and put a lot of emphasis
on scientific software engineering, notably through the
[Bioconductor](http://bioconductor.org/) project. Open and
reproducible research is central in the lab: all software are publicly
available under permissive licenses, all our publications are
published as
[pre-prints](https://www.biorxiv.org/search/author1%3ALaurent%2BGatto%20jcode%3Abiorxiv%20numresults%3A10%20sort%3Arelevance-rank%20format_result%3Astandard),
and we work hard to make our efforts reproducible.

The lab supports a friendly and supportive work environment through
flexible working hours (for example for your young parents) and the
possibility for work from home. The lab meetings are typically
scheduled in-person (or mixed remote/in-person if anyone can't join)
to favour interactions among lab members.

## Interested in applying?

All positions are open PhD or MSc (depending on experience) in
computer science, bioinformatics or other relevant disciplines. Feel
free to contact me by email or over twitter for further questions.

If you would like to apply, please send an email (at
`first.last<AT>uclouvain<DOT>be`), specifying which position you are
interested in, and provide

- a letter of motivation (1 page is enough, but be specific);
- a CV with pre-prints and publications (if any), software and data
  analysis projects and education;
- the name and contact details of two academic or professional
  references, explaining in what capacity these references know you.

In your application, please make sure you highlight why you are keen
to apply for a specific position and how you are a good fit. For
instance, the HYGIEIA bioinformatics position requires experience in
omics data processing and pipeline automation - make sure you
demonstrate such an experience with example code and data. If
referring to a paper or pre-print, be explicit on you specific
contributions and how these are relevant for the position. I am more
interested in reading some of your open source code rather than being
pointed to a handful of papers.
