---
title: "Ungrading my teaching"
tags: ["education", "teaching"]
comments: false
---

I have been extremely lucky to participate in a [Carpentries
instructor](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/)
training as an early career researcher. By then, I had only taught a
few workshops, and was very impressed by the content of the training,
and by [Greg Wilson](https://third-bit.com/), who delivered it with
touching sincerity and dedication. A couple of years later, I managed
to secure some funding from the [R
Consortium](https://www.r-consortium.org/) to organise an instructor
course in Cambridge, where I worked at the time, and was delighted to
be able to revisit the content. The Carpentries approach to lesson
design and teaching has stuck with me since then. I have applied these
principles and some of the material to my main university courses
([WSBIM1207](http://bit.ly/WSBIM1207) and
[WSBIM1322](http://bit.ly/WSBIM1207) for the second and third bachelor
courses respectively and [WSBIM2122](http://bit.ly/WSBIM2122) for the
master's course), and am now, as part of the [Bioconductor Teaching
committee](https://www.bioconductor.org/help/education-training/),
developing new lessons.

Delivering good courses at workshops isn't an easy task, but everybody
can get there with the right preparation and support (such as proposed
by the Carpentries). There is however one aspect that makes it
*easier* than teaching a university curriculum: as an workshop
instructor, you focus on the day (or days) you teach, giving your
best, and then it's over - no need to think about
tomorrow. Participants will hopefully apply what they have learnt,
some might get back to you with questions (extremely rare in my
experience), but others might not and you'll never hear from them. In
a university setting, on the other hand, you have to think about
assignments, test, exams, marks, ... and possibly even about
pre-requisites for follow-up classes. You have to be able to assess
the students, i.e. assess whether they have acquired (enough of) the
material, and whether they are sufficiently well prepared for next
year's class and, more generally, their future activities. In my
opinion/experience, this makes for a more complex teaching experience,
more careful planning and a whole different level of responsibilities.

## Criticising my own pedagogy

I have adapted how I test/assess students during the 4 years, 3 course
and 10 semester classes I have taught since I moved to my current
position. Following the Carpentries philosophy, my courses are
hands-on and are based on repeated practice, so that students *get it*
and have a chance to apply what they have learnt. As opposed to other
courses, it isn't quite possible to leave it to the last week(s)
before the exam to cram all the material in short term memory -
students need to attend and practise exercises in class and (ideally
also) at home. To promote students' work, I organise weekly tests
which, for a couple of years now, allowed those that earned good
marks, to transfer their mean test scores to their final grade, and
thus get a dispense for the exam. Unfortunately, this hasn't proven as
successful as I had hoped.

The reason for the failure of this test/dispense approach is well
known to those that have studied to effect of marking and grading -
the focus of the student is switched from *learning* new skills to
obtaining a *good* mark. And, as clearly stated by Marcus
Schultz-Bergin in his chapter *Grade Anarchy in the Philosophy
Classroom* (p. 175) (from [^1]): **Grades do not track learning** (or
anything else of importance) and, to add insult to injury, **grading
reduces student learning**.

This indeed matches my observation. My students have access to any
material they see fit for the tests and exams. Some focus their
preparation on gathering as much material as possible (such as answers
from previous tests and exercises) and then apply the *minimax*
strategy to maximise the marks while minimising their own work by
matching the answers they have gathered to the questions of the
day. The focus of the tests has become the tests' marks, and most
criticism/feedback at the end of a lesson (I use the Carpentries
famous [colour sticky
notes](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/21-management/index.html#sticky-notes)
to increase interactions and collect feedback after each class) was
the lack of time to finish/get good marks, with little questioning
about the understanding/mastering of the material (such as being able
to answer the questions in a limited but doable amount of time).

It is important to clarify here that I don't blame the
students. Students, as a collective entity, will adapt to rules and
constrains that are set to them. Maximising the success in exams is a
natural adaptation to the current system, that has focused on grades
as a mean of standardisation. Even if the goal of this standardisation
is (or was) equality and fairness (in the face of an increasing number
of students), it has led to the acquisition of grades to become the
main (and often only) assessment of successful learning and teaching.

## UNgrading, why rating students undermines learning

During the last summer holidays, I read *UNgrading, why rating
students undermines learning (and what to do instead)* [^1], a
collection of chapters edited by Susan D. Blum, highlighting the
issues with grading and sharing the experiences of some instructors
that decided to drop them in their classes. To summarise the main
arguments made by the many authors in the book, I'll cite Marcus
Schultz-Bergin again:

1. Grades do not track learning (or anything else of importance).
2. Grading reduces student learning.
3. Only receiving feedback (and no grades) increases student learning.
4. Self-evaluation and self-reflection improve student learning.

The last point refers to the concept of *meta-cognition*, thinking
about how we think, and learn, and the ability to self-assess. It is
paramount for students to learn how to receive and use the feedback
they are given. Self-evaluation of one's own learning process should
be the ultimate goal of any teaching enterprise, as it essentially
provides the means for anyone to learn any new subject they are
interested in.

The authors provide more details about points 1 and 2 above, but my
own observation made it abundantly clear that, despite my best
intentions, tests offering a possibility to get a dispense for the
exam wasn't working. I took plenty of notes during my reading of the
ungrading book and have devised alternative approaches that I'm
looking forward to apply this semester. I will drop marking and put as
much emphasis as possible on providing feedback, and leading students
to assess their own work, focusing on understanding and mastering the
material, rather than on obtaining grades. Before I describe my plans,
I must specify that I will have to provide a grade for the end of year
assessment, that students will earn with an exam. Even though I am
convinced that marking isn't an appropriate assessment of learning, I
will first need to implement this in my classes and assess if/how this
affects student learning and (hopefully) how they perform in that
final exam. There is a long learning curve ahead (for me) and battle
to extend this further. I have exciting plans for my bachelor and
master courses. Read on...

## First steps in ungraded land

I will be dropping grades in all the tests that are given throughout
the term (typically at each or most lectures but the first one) in
both bachelor courses. The first implication of this is that there
won't be any opportunity for students to be dispensed from the final
exam, which is an opportunity several counted on. I will thus need to
make sure that the reasons for this, described above, are clear (see
point 1 below). The goal is to promote self-evaluation, feedback on
their understanding of the material, and a reflection on their
learning process. Instead of grading each individual test (a
time-consuming activity), we will answer test's questions together, in
class, right after the test itself. This is something I have done
previously, albeit rather swiftly. Here, I intend to take more time
and involve the students as much as possible by asking for their
active participation. After the collaborative correction, I will ask
them to answer a quick poll, assessing whether (1) they understood the
material but need more work to really master it, (2) they mastered the
material and are ready to move on or (3) they neither understood nor
mastered it and will ask for help (see point 2 below). Teaching
assistants (TAs) and myself will spare some considerable time by not
grading tens of copies (sometime over 60) and will seize it to put
this new pedagogical strategy into place. After the poll, students
will be invited to review their work after the lecture, in the light
of the correction and their self-assessment and come to us to ask
specific questions about their work, things they struggled with, or
advice on how they could improve their learning (see point 3
below). The goal of this is to steer away from grades and re-focus on
their understanding/mastering of the material, offer opportunities for
personalised feedback, and promote self-evaluation and
meta-cognition. Fingers crossed!

Self-evaluation works best in an environment where we trust each
other. To emphasise this, I have also decided to change the attendance
formalities. Since the beginning, I have made attendance mandatory. At
my institution and in Belgium in general, attendance is only mandatory
for practicals, and optional for formal lectures. Given that in my
courses, theory and practice blend into each other, that I try to give
as much hands-on work as possible during the classes, and that it is
unlikely to master the material without that practice anyway, presence
was mandatory, and TAs circulated attendance sheet that students had
to sign. I will be honest that I didn't check them systematically and
didn't follow up on absences. But I thought that this *pressure* would
force students to attend and get them a chance to practise. I decided
to change this. Attendance is still mandatory for the reasons
mentioned above, but I will not use presence sheets anymore. If a
student can't make it, I'm asking for a short email to let me know
that they aren't or weren't able to attend. I do not need any reason
for the absence. I will just ask them to specify, in that email, how
they plan to make up for the missed lesson, including asking me or the
TAs for extra help. I think this approach builds on trust and
self-motivation, invites students to take responsibility for their own
learning, and promotes reflection of their progress, notably when they
miss a class (whatever the reason).

## First self-assessments (theirs and mine)

Here's how things look like after a couple of weeks:

1. A short live poll (using sticky notes) during the first class of
   the year, after explaining the reasons for dropping the dispense
   and implementing the new strategy, was seen in a positive light by
   the great majority of the students. A handful of the 50 students
   regretted not being able to get a dispense. My impression is that
   these are the students that were aiming to get one (some of them
   probably already got one for the previous course), and consider
   this a loss (for them, personally) compared to the opportunities
   offered by the change.

2. The first post-test polls of the year indicate that the majority of
   students understand the material but needed more work to fully
   master it (from 55 to 85%). Smaller fractions of students don't
   understand the material and conceded they need more help (8 to 14%)
   or fully master it (from 0 to 17%). The proportions are variable,
   depending on the chapter, but the fraction of students
   understanding the material is always the largest, by a comfortable
   margin.

3. We set up office hours during the week and just before the
   lectures, making sure that these didn't conflict with the student
   schedule. So far, for the first weeks this has been in place, the
   number of students that booked and met with us was not in line with
   the poll - we meet with 1 to 3 students per week, out of a total
   over 40.

4. I have received a couple of emails from students not being able to
   attend. Most were related to clashes in their schedule (for
   students that had lectures from second and third bachelor
   years). Some of these emails did follow the guideline and explained
   how they intended to make up for missing the classes: work by
   themselves, use the recordings we provide, interact with class
   mates who do attend the lectures. Along the same lines, I had one
   student that explicitly wrote that they would revise the sections
   they struggled with on their end-of-class red sticky notes.

## Adjustments for smaller classes

The master's course provides more freedom to experiment further, as
there are less students in the class and allows for more one-to-one
interactions.

- So far, students had to prepare and present two data analysis
  reports throughout the semester course, focusing on two different
  high-throughput data types (transcriptomics and proteomics). We
  devote 3 to 4 successive session to each project: (1) lectures and
  exercises for them to learn and practice the theory, (2) a session
  where they test what they have learnt on their own data and can ask
  questions about the material and their data and (3) a short
  presentation with questions from the audience (other students and
  instructors), followed by, the following week, the submission of a
  detailed report that takes into account the questions and discussion
  during the respective presentations. I am considering to let
  students choose whether they prefer to do the second project, or
  propose improvements and extension to the first project and, if they
  wish, implement these during the next practice sessions.

- I am also considering to ask students to comment on each others
  written reports, in addition to the question and answer sessions, to
  further emphasise peer assessment and promote
  peer/self-evaluation. This could also be a good source of
  inspiration for improvements and extension to their first project
  (see previous point).

- During the master course's oral exam, we focus primarily on the
  questions and discussions from the written reports. I systematically
  ask what students preferred in the course or felt they have mastered
  best, and what they struggled with. I would like to go a step
  further and ask them to propose and motivate their marks.

## Ideas for the future

Depending on how the attempts above are received and how they
influence the students' learning, I might consider propose a more
ambitious project to the 3rd bachelor students. This might only really
apply to students that are re-taking the class and thus have already
an overview of the whole material, and are in a position to anticipate
the kind of data, analyses and interpretation that would be expected.

1. One or a group of students will be able to choose a project they
   want to work on throughout the year. Choosing a project would
   entail to identify a dataset and one or several questions they want
   to address with that data, confirm that the project would be
   written up as a (reproducible) report, and, if they work as a
   group, some sort of agreement that all members of the group will
   contribute.

2. They have total freedom in the complexity of the data and questions
   they choose to work on. It could either be a rather ambitous
   project, that would account for all credits/marks of the course, or
   choose something smaller. There could be an option to make up for
   the rest of the marks with (parts of) the final exam (that those
   that didn't choose a project would have to take anyway), although I
   haven't figured out the details of this.

3. The students and the education team (i.e. TAs and myself) would
   discuss their project (data and questions), the feasibility and the
   adequacy of their proposal, and the marks they would obtain upon
   successful completion. All these are open to discussion and
   amendments during the iterations in the next point.

4. Students and the education team would meet regularly to discuss the
   project's advancement and provide guidance to help them to
   successfully reach their goals. These goals and the marks/credits
   could be revisited accordingly: an overly ambitous project could be
   reduced and, conversely, if the goals are attained earlier than
   expected, students could propose extensions if they wish so.

5. I think students should have the freedom to back out whenever they
   want to, if at any point they prefer to take the exam. They should
   also have the freedom to propose a project that counts for, say 50%
   of the marks, and settle with that without taking the exam if they
   reach their goals.

6. The completion of the project would be officialised by the final
   submission of the report. Importantly, the education team wouldn't
   read/discover that report for the first time at that point, but
   would have followed its progress throughout the year so that, at
   the time of submission, little doubts persist as to the successful
   completion of the project.

7. If students worked as a group, they would need to provide a section
   describing their respective contributions. Again, these would have
   been laid out early on, and possibly updated, throughout the
   project. Every student of the group would get the same final mark
   but individuals would get recognised for their specific
   contribution.

## Final thoughts

There is quite some excitement on my part with these new approaches,
which has, I believe, a positive impact on my teaching. The lectures
seem to have become more interactive: I try to make sure that all/most
students get asked questions about the material we see and the
exercises we do. Based on the sticky notes feedback that are collected
at the end of each lecture, they seem to appreciate it because it
improves their involvement and attention.  In previous years, sampling
students at random for to answer my questions was reported as being
stressful on the sticky notes. It feels like clarifying and
verbalising the goals gives me more freedom to reach out to the
students and them to take it as a genuine learning opportunity. The
latest set of sticky notes goes along these lines and gives hope for
the future.


**Edit**:

- Here's a [first ungrading
  assessment](https://lgatto.github.io/ungrading-assessment/), posted
  on 15 December 2022.
- A short interview, in French: [Evaluation dans l'enseignement
  supérieur : « UNgrading » ou évaluer et apprendre sans
  points](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4KebCqSP8Q).


[^1]: In *UNgrading, why rating students undermines learning (and what to do instead)*, Susan D. Blum (editor), 2020.
