---
title: "CBIO internal communication goes open source"
tags: ["CBIO", "communication"]
comments: false
---

I have been using slack for a rather long time as a discussion
platform for the lab, even before moving to Belgium. Based on the
access log, I set up the lab slack workspace in June 2016. It has
proven very useful, even with the more recent limitations that come
with the free slack plan. I have been thinking for some time that I
should move to an open source offering. Based on a little bit of
reading
([here](https://blog.ossph.org/best-open-source-alternatives-to-slack/)
and [here](https://opensource.com/alternatives/slack)) and asking on
[social media](https://fosstodon.org/@lgatto/111840609295851868),
there were a couple of contenders:
[Mattermost](https://mattermost.com/),
[element.io](https://element.io/),
[rocket.chat](https://www.rocket.chat/) and
[Zulip](https://zulip.com/).

My needs are pretty simple: I would like to have access to all
messages, and apps for various desktop and mobile OSes. Cost is also
an issue - with say 15 users at around 7$ per month, it would cost the
lab over 1200$ per year. While not a big amount per se for an academic
lab, given the restrictions of what can be paid for from academic
funding (salary only or consumable, for example), that money is money
that couldn't be used to support students with their travelling to
conferences. I thus considered self-hosting, but it wasn't clear I
could get the support from IT, a public facing IP, with the necessary
port accessible to the world.

Then I discovered that Zulip offers their Cloud Standard plan for
[https://zulip.com/for/research/](free for academic research), which
is what I finally went for with `cbio.zulipchat.com`. They ask to
acknowledge their support on the [lab
webpage](https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-lab/) (see at the bottom),
which is a fair request. The sponsorship was accepted on the day, and
a couple of days later, their support
[imported](https://zulip.com/help/import-from-slack)[^fn] all the
slack messages from our non-private channels.

So far, all works very smoothly, and I'm quite happy. The web
interface and the GNU/Linux and Android apps work very well. I think
I'm also liking the possibility to provide a title to post/thread -
future will tell if all members make use of this. Another useful
difference with slack (at least the free plan) is there are [guest
accounts](https://zulip.com/help/roles-and-permissions) (that are
given access to specific streams/channels when joining), in addition
to regular members (who can join all public streams).

[^fn]: Even if one can only see the last messages with a free slack
    plan, all messages from public channels get exported. This, and a
    bot user OAuth token is all they need.
